Margaret Levi - political scientist. Theory of the state.

Optimistic view of development of society: from "Why do we need a new theory of government

"If the story is all in structure, geography, demography, initial conditions, path dependence, and exogenous shocks, then perhaps we should simply sit back and let history take its course.

...

But to say that there are constraints and that some of those constraints are quite rigid is comparable to describing human mentality as only hard wiring.

Humans learn, and so do societies.

The quality of government depends on the quality of institutions and constitutional design but also on the quality of leadership, the accuracy of beliefs held by the population about the nature of the world in which they live, and the existence of preferences for a society that is just and fair for the minority as well as the majority.

When a combination of individuals with the incentives and imagination to figure out how to operate better within or even to overcome the status quo, we observe institutional transformation and creation."

Not sure I agree with the agency ascribed to socieities. Individuals can fashion changes in their own lives, and to a much smaller degree in the lives of others. Intention to change as the main driver of change bypasses the complexity in the world we live in. 

"Fortunately, there is less concern now with rather abstract “theories of the state” and more with government, the organization and individuals who establish and administer public policies and laws."

Disagree in a SSA context, as the formal institutions of government often doesn't do the governing.

[[new-institutional-economics]]
[[political-science]]

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[new-institutional-economics]: new-institutional-economics.md "New Institutional Economics"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"