# Okri

Wrote the Famished Road - booker prize winner 1991.

About a family in a small peri-urban village in Nigeria.
Politics, poverty.
Elements of fantasy, child's imagination, or augmenting reality through tradition?

Also, Songs of Enchantment (sequal)

‘Once upon a time’ she said, in a voice that was also a mood, ‘human beings were happy and they lived forever. They did not know death. When it was time for them to change, a light would surround them, and a bird would fly out from the centre of the light. At that moment the person was being re-born – sometimes in the same place, sometimes in another. Human beings understood everything. They had no language as such. With their thoughts they could talk to trees and animals and to one another. There were no wars. People didn’t travel far. And they understood the language of angels. They could actually see angles.’

Mum paused and looked at me with twinkling eyes. She smiled again and continued.
‘The one day a rainbow appeared on the earth. It was very beautiful. Where it touched, the earth turned into gold. Then a young man said: ‘I saw that rainbow first. It is mine.’ The men began to argue. They fought. The young man killed his best friend in the fight, and claimed the rainbow. Then he claimed it, he became different. He knew hunger. Darkness entered him. He wanted new things, new places, new experiences. He saw the women differently, and he wanted them. There was one in particular whom he wanted more than all the others, so he didn’t even bother to go to the chief, her father. He went straight to the girl and said: ‘If I can have you, I will give you half of my rainbow.’ It came to pass. The girl became different. She too wanted new things, new experiences. She hungered for dark unknown places. The young man and the girl caused trouble everywhere with their new desires and their ambitions. And because of them fighting broke out and blood was spilled. There were retaliation. And people’s time came up when it wasn’t supposed to and they were re-born too quickly and so they didn’t live long. Corruption came upon the people and grew fat. Diseases dwelled in them and Misery had many children among them. The world turned upside down. Creation became confusion.’
Mum paused again. Dad had stopped polishing his boots to listen to her story. He stared at her with eyes wide open, his gestures frozen, every part of him alert and listening, caught in mum’s spell. Touching me again on the head, the smile still playing on her lips, she carried on with the story.
‘God saw all of this misery and darkness, and was not happy. So he sent Death down amongst human beings to remind them of the miraculous life they had before. Death lived amongst them. Everyone was miserable, but Death was happy. In fact he was very happy. The people did not recognise him and did not listen to his message. They went on as before, increasing their misfortune, making things worse. Soon things got so bad that the people no longer understood the language of trees and animals. They no longer saw angels and came to believe that such things had never existed. They no longer understood one another. They became greedy. They broke into tribes. They had wars all the time. And they moved away from the great garden that was their home and travelled far out into unknown darknesses. Death became so angry because human beings did not respect him and did not heed his message that he decided to take the law into his own hands. He drove them deeper into the darkness. He laid waste their habitations, destroyed their means of living, and scattered them all over the earth. Some went to places where ice fell from the sky, and some went to where the sun blazed from the heavens. But Death became the king of the world. He was a very wicked king. He punished human beings and trees and animals for every conceivable reason. His punishment was final. There was no appeal. And then he sent out his children to be the kings of all the scattered tribes of humankind.
‘God, seeing that Death had not only disobeyed him but also tried to rule the world, was not happy at all. So he sent a little blue bird down to earth. Wen the bird arrived, it turned into a child.’
There was another pause.
‘Then what did the child do?’ I asked.
‘The child travelled to the kingdom where Death was King. He found the King and said: “I have come to kill you.” The King in fact nearly died from laughing: “How can you kill Death?” he asked. The child smiled and said “With love.” Then the child left. Afterwards Death became angry at the threat and rode through the world killing off people. He poisoned people’s hearts. He destroyed everything that was visible till there were only skeletons everywhere. He did this out of arrogance; he thought that because he could kill therefore he was God. And when he had completed his destruction of everything the child came to hum and said “You did what I expected you to do. Your work is finished New human beings are being created from the old. From now on you will be king only over those who believe in you. God has put one new thing into people and that is love. If people lose it, they are yours”. Then the child became a bird again and flew back up to heaven. And that is how Death was killed by a small bird,’ mum said, ending here story.
‘So is Death dead?’ I asked.
‘Death is everywhere, listening, waiting to jump on those who believe in his religion.’
