# PhD Third Section

The third section of my PhD is a case study evaluation of the Systematic Land Titling and Registration (SLTR) in Ondo State, Nigeria.
I conducted fieldwork, hosted by FUTA in Akure Nigeria.
I collected household survey data from two LGAs - Ifedore and Idanre.
293 interviews.

The titling policy happened in Ifedore, not in Idanre.
However, it was implemented badly - a few plots were registered, but certificates were never issued.
My survey was to understand the tenure systems in Ifedore and Idanre to see what about the underlying tenure system might have led to poor implementation, and generally to get a better sense of what was going on.

The results show well demarkated farmland, a (dual) land market where some plots can be sold and others cannot, very few disputes, and a surprising willingness to pay for a certificate of occupancy.

I argue that in general it could benefit communities to have the same mode of land governance across communities. This uses the argument of [[North]] in terms of information / transaction costs. Rather than the arguments of [[Besley]] / World Bank of tenure security. This would facilitate transactions across communities, state development projects, commercial agriculture and various productivity enhancing improvements. There are, however, downsides to this socially and politically.

The two barriers to reform are 1) political. Community leaders are traditional accepted authority, and they perform effective governance today. Moving from specific local governance to general central governance requires a change in authority. 1) people do not trust that this will happen, a multi-player prisoners dilemma game. In general, if everyone did it, it would be better. However, noone will make the first step. (see [[Schelling]] and [[Bowles]] for analytical underpinning).

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[North]: north "North"
[Besley]: besley "Besley"
[Schelling]: schelling "Schelling"
[Bowles]: bowles "Bowles"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"